docs/integrations/dbt.md, before:

# dbt

SQLMesh has native support for running dbt projects with its dbt adapter.

!!! tip

    If you've never used SQLMesh before, learn the basics of how it works in the [SQLMesh Quickstart](../quick_start.md)!

## Getting started

### Installing SQLMesh

SQLMesh is a Python library you install with the `pip` command. We recommend running your SQLMesh projects in a [Python virtual environment](../installation.md#python-virtual-environment), which must be created and activated before running any `pip` commands.

Most people do not use all of SQLMesh's functionality. For example, most projects only run on one [SQL execution engine](../integrations/overview.md#execution-engines).

Therefore, SQLMesh is packaged with multiple "extras," which you may optionally install based on the functionality your project needs. You may specify all your project's extras in a single `pip` call.

At minimum, using the SQLMesh dbt adapter requires installing the dbt extra:

```bash
> pip install "sqlmesh[dbt]"
```

If your project uses any SQL execution engine other than DuckDB, you must install the extra for that engine. For example, if your project runs on the Postgres SQL engine:

```bash
> pip install "sqlmesh[dbt,postgres]"
```

If you would like to use the [SQLMesh Browser UI](../guides/ui.md) to view column-level lineage, include the `web` extra:

```bash
> pip install "sqlmesh[dbt,web]"
```

Learn more about [SQLMesh installation and extras here](../installation.md#install-extras).

### Reading a dbt project

Prepare an existing dbt project to be run by SQLMesh by executing the `sqlmesh init` command *within the dbt project root directory* and with the `dbt` template option:

```bash
$ sqlmesh init -t dbt
```

This will create a file called `sqlmesh.yaml` containing the [default model start date](../reference/model_configuration.md#model-defaults). This configuration file is a minimum starting point for enabling SQLMesh to work with your DBT project.

As you become more comfortable with running your project under SQLMesh, you may specify additional SQLMesh [configuration](../reference/configuration.md) as required to unlock more features.

!!! note "profiles.yml"

    SQLMesh will use the existing data warehouse connection target from your dbt project's `profiles.yml` file so the connection configuration does not need to be duplicated in `sqlmesh.yaml`. You may change the target at any time in the dbt config and SQLMesh will pick up the new target.

### Setting model backfill start dates

Models **require** a start date for backfilling data through use of the `start` configuration parameter. `start` can be defined individually for each model in its `config` block or globally in the `sqlmesh.yaml` file as follows:

=== "sqlmesh.yaml"

    ```yaml
    model_defaults:
      start: '2000-01-01'
    ```

=== "dbt Model"

    ```jinja
    {{
      config(
        materialized='incremental',
        start='2000-01-01',
        ...
      )
    }}
    ```

### Configuration

SQLMesh derives a project's configuration from its dbt configuration files. This section outlines additional settings specific to SQLMesh that can be defined.

#### Selecting a different state connection

[Certain engines](https://sqlmesh.readthedocs.io/en/stable/guides/configuration/?h=unsupported#state-connection), like Trino, cannot be used to store SQLMesh's state.

In addition, even if your warehouse is supported for state, you may find that you get better performance by using a [traditional database](../concepts/state.md) to store state as these are a better fit for the state workload than a warehouse optimized for analytics workloads.

In these cases, we recommend specifying a [supported production state engine](../concepts/state.md#state) using the `state_connection` configuration.

This involves updating `sqlmesh.yaml` to add a gateway configuration for the state connection:

```yaml
gateways:
  "": # "" (empty string) is the default gateway
    state_connection:
      type: postgres
      ...

model_defaults:
  start: '2000-01-01'
```

Or, for a specific dbt profile defined in `profiles.yml`, eg `dev`:

```yaml
gateways:
  dev: # must match the target dbt profile name
    state_connection:
      type: postgres
      ...

model_defaults:
  start: '2000-01-01'
```

Learn more about how to configure state connections [here](https://sqlmesh.readthedocs.io/en/stable/guides/configuration/#state-connection).

#### Runtime vars

dbt supports passing variable values at runtime with its [CLI `vars` option](https://docs.getdbt.com/docs/build/project-variables#defining-variables-on-the-command-line).

In SQLMesh, these variables are passed via configurations. When you initialize a dbt project with `sqlmesh init`, a file `sqlmesh.yaml` is created in your project directory.

You may define global variables in the same way as a native project by adding a `variables` section to the config.

For example, we could specify the runtime variable `is_marketing` and its value `no` as:

```yaml
variables:
  is_marketing: no

model_defaults:
  start: '2000-01-01'
```

Variables can also be set at the gateway/profile level which override variables set at the project level. See the [variables documentation](../concepts/macros/sqlmesh_macros.md#gateway-variables) to learn more about how to specify them at different levels.

#### Combinations

Some projects use combinations of runtime variables to control project behavior. Different combinations can be specified in different `sqlmesh_config` objects, with the relevant configuration passed to the SQLMesh CLI command.

!!! info "Python config"

    Switching between different config objects requires the use of [Python config](../guides/configuration.md#python) instead of the default YAML config.

    You will need to create a file called `config.py` in the root of your project with the following contents:

    ```py
    from pathlib import Path
    from sqlmesh.dbt.loader import sqlmesh_config

    config = sqlmesh_config(Path(__file__).parent)
    ```

    Note that any config from `sqlmesh.yaml` will be overlayed on top of the active Python config so you dont need to remove the `sqlmesh.yaml` file

For example, consider a project with a special configuration for the `marketing` department. We could create separate configurations to pass at runtime like this:

```python
config = sqlmesh_config(
  Path(__file__).parent,
  variables={"is_marketing": "no", "include_pii": "no"}
)

marketing_config = sqlmesh_config(
  Path(__file__).parent,
  variables={"is_marketing": "yes", "include_pii": "yes"}
)
```

By default, SQLMesh will use the configuration object named `config`. Use a different configuration by passing the object name to SQLMesh CLI commands with the `--config` option. For example, we could run a `plan` with the marketing configuration like this:

```python
sqlmesh --config marketing_config plan
```

Note that the `--config` option is specified between the word `sqlmesh` and the command being executed (e.g., `plan`, `run`).

#### Registering comments

SQLMesh automatically registers model descriptions and column comments with the target SQL engine, as described in the [Models Overview documentation](../concepts/models/overview#model-description-and-comments). Comment registration is on by default for all engines that support it.

dbt offers similar comment registration functionality via its [`persist_docs` model configuration parameter](https://docs.getdbt.com/reference/resource-configs/persist_docs), specified by model. SQLMesh comment registration is configured at the project level, so it does not use dbt's model-specific `persist_docs` configuration.

SQLMesh's project-level comment registration defaults are overridden with the `sqlmesh_config()` `register_comments` argument. For example, this configuration turns comment registration off:

```python
config = sqlmesh_config(
    Path(__file__).parent,
    register_comments=False,
    )
```

### Running SQLMesh

Run SQLMesh as with a SQLMesh project, generating and applying [plans](../concepts/overview.md#make-a-plan), running [tests](../concepts/overview.md#tests) or [audits](../concepts/overview.md#audits), and executing models with a [scheduler](../guides/scheduling.md) if desired.

You continue to use your dbt file and project format.

## Workflow differences between SQLMesh and dbt

Consider the following when using a dbt project:

* SQLMesh will detect and deploy new or modified seeds as part of running the `plan` command and applying changes - there is no separate seed command. Refer to [seed models](../concepts/models/seed_models.md) for more information.
* The `plan` command dynamically creates environments, so environments do not need to be hardcoded into your `profiles.yml` file as targets. To get the most out of SQLMesh, point your dbt profile target at the production target and let SQLMesh handle the rest for you.
* The term "test" has a different meaning in dbt than in SQLMesh:
    - dbt "tests" are [audits](../concepts/audits.md) in SQLMesh.
    - SQLMesh "tests" are [unit tests](../concepts/tests.md), which test query logic before applying a SQLMesh plan.
* dbt's' recommended incremental logic is not compatible with SQLMesh, so small tweaks to the models are required (don't worry - dbt can still use the models!).

## How to use SQLMesh incremental models with dbt projects

Incremental loading is a powerful technique when datasets are large and recomputing tables is expensive. SQLMesh offers first-class support for incremental models, and its approach differs from dbt's.

This section describes how to adapt dbt's incremental models to run on sqlmesh and maintain backwards compatibility with dbt.

### Incremental types

SQLMesh supports two approaches to implement [idempotent](../concepts/glossary.md#idempotency) incremental loads:

* Using merge (with the sqlmesh [`INCREMENTAL_BY_UNIQUE_KEY` model kind](../concepts/models/model_kinds.md#incremental_by_unique_key))
* Using insert-overwrite/delete+insert (with the sqlmesh [`INCREMENTAL_BY_TIME_RANGE` model kind](../concepts/models/model_kinds.md#incremental_by_time_range))

#### Incremental by unique key

To enable incremental_by_unique_key incrementality, the model configuration should contain:

* The `unique_key` key with the model's unique key field name or names as the value
* The `materialized` key with value `'incremental'`
* Either:
    * No `incremental_strategy` key or
    * The `incremental_strategy` key with value `'merge'`

#### Incremental by time range

To enable incremental_by_time_range incrementality, the model configuration should contain:

* The `time_column` key with the model's time column field name as the value (see [`time column`](../concepts/models/model_kinds.md#time-column) for details)
* The `materialized` key with value `'incremental'`
* Either:
    * The `incremental_strategy` key with value `'insert_overwrite'` or
    * The `incremental_strategy` key with value `'delete+insert'`
    * Note: in this context, these two strategies are synonyms. Regardless of which one is specified SQLMesh will use the [`best incremental strategy`](../concepts/models/model_kinds.md#materialization-strategy) for the target engine.

### Incremental logic

SQLMesh requires a new jinja block gated by `{% if sqlmesh_incremental is defined %}`. The new block should supersede the existing `{% if is_incremental() %}` block and contain the `WHERE` clause selecting the time interval.

For example, the SQL `WHERE` clause with the "ds" column goes in a new jinja block gated by `{% if sqlmesh_incremental is defined %}` as follows:

```bash
> {% if sqlmesh_incremental is defined %}
>   WHERE
>     ds BETWEEN '{{ start_ds }}' AND '{{ end_ds }}'
> {% elif is_incremental() %}
>   ; < your existing is_incremental block >
> {% endif %}
```

`{{ start_ds }}` and `{{ end_ds }}` are the jinja equivalents of SQLMesh's `@start_ds` and `@end_ds` predefined time macro variables. See all [predefined time variables](../concepts/macros/macro_variables.md) available in jinja.

### Incremental model configuration

SQLMesh provides configuration parameters that enable control over how incremental computations occur. These parameters are set in the model's `config` block.

The [`batch_size` parameter](../concepts/models/overview.md#batch_size) determines the maximum number of time intervals to run in a single job.

The [`lookback` parameter](../concepts/models/overview.md#lookback) is used to capture late arriving data. It sets the number of units of late arriving data the model should expect and must be a positive integer.

**Note:** By default, all incremental dbt models are configured to be [forward-only](../concepts/plans.md#forward-only-plans). However, you can change this behavior by setting the `forward_only: false` setting either in the configuration of an individual model or globally for all models in the `dbt_project.yaml` file. The [forward-only](../concepts/plans.md#forward-only-plans) mode aligns more closely with the typical operation of dbt and therefore better meets user's expectations.

Similarly, the [allow_partials](../concepts/models/overview.md#allow_partials) parameter is set to `true` by default for incremental dbt models unless the time column is specified, or the `allow_partials` parameter is explicitly set to `false` in the model configuration.

#### on_schema_change

SQLMesh automatically detects destructive schema changes to [forward-only incremental models](../guides/incremental_time.md#forward-only-models) and to all incremental models in [forward-only plans](../concepts/plans.md#destructive-changes).

A model's [`on_destructive_change` setting](../guides/incremental_time.md#destructive-changes) determines whether it errors (default), warns, or silently allows the changes. SQLMesh always allows non-destructive forward-only schema changes, such as adding or casting a column in place.

`on_schema_change` configuration values are mapped to these SQLMesh `on_destructive_change` values:

| `on_schema_change` | SQLMesh `on_destructive_change` |
| ------------------ | ------------------------------- |
| ignore             | warn                            |
| append_new_columns | warn                            |
| sync_all_columns   | allow                           |
| fail               | error                           |


## Snapshot support

SQLMesh supports both dbt snapshot strategies of either `timestamp` or `check`.
Only unsupported snapshot functionality is `invalidate_hard_deletes` which must be set to `True`.
If set to `False`, then the snapshot will be skipped and a warning will be logged indicating this happened.
Support for this will be added soon.

## Tests
SQLMesh uses dbt tests to perform SQLMesh [audits](../concepts/audits.md) (coming soon).

Add SQLMesh [unit tests](../concepts/tests.md) to a dbt project by placing them in the "tests" directory.

## Seed column types

SQLMesh parses seed CSV files using [Panda's `read_csv` utility](https://pandas.pydata.org/pandas-docs/stable/reference/api/pandas.read_csv.html) and its default column type inference.

dbt parses seed CSV files using [agate's csv reader](https://agate.readthedocs.io/en/latest/api/csv.html#csv-reader-and-writer) and [customizes agate's default type inference](https://github.com/dbt-labs/dbt-common/blob/ae8ffe082926fdb3ef2a15486588f40c7739aea9/dbt_common/clients/agate_helper.py#L59).

If SQLMesh and dbt infer different column types for a seed CSV file, you may specify a [column_types](https://docs.getdbt.com/reference/resource-configs/column_types) dictionary in your `dbt_project.yml` file, where the keys define the column names and the values the data types.

``` yaml
seeds:
  <seed name>
    +column_types:
      <column name>: <SQL data type>
```

Alternatively, you can define this dictionary in the seed [seed properties configuration file](https://docs.getdbt.com/reference/seed-properties).

``` yaml
seeds:
  - name: <seed name>
    config:
      column_types:
        <column name>: <SQL data type>
```

You may also specify a column's SQL data type in its `data_type` key, as shown below. The file must list all columns present in the CSV file; SQLMesh's default type inference will be used for columns that do not specify the `data_type` key.

``` yaml
seeds:
  - name: <seed name>
    columns:
      - name: <column name>
        data_type: <SQL data type>
```

## Package Management
SQLMesh does not have its own package manager; however, SQLMesh's dbt adapter is compatible with dbt's package manager. Continue to use [dbt deps](https://docs.getdbt.com/reference/commands/deps) and [dbt clean](https://docs.getdbt.com/reference/commands/clean) to update, add, or remove packages.

## Documentation
Model documentation is available in the [SQLMesh UI](../quickstart/ui.md#2-open-the-sqlmesh-web-ui).

## Supported dbt jinja methods

SQLMesh supports running dbt projects using the majority of dbt jinja methods, including:

| Method      | Method         | Method       | Method  |
| ----------- | -------------- | ------------ | ------- |
| adapter (*) | env_var        | project_name | target  |
| as_bool     | exceptions     | ref          | this    |
| as_native   | from_yaml      | return       | to_yaml |
| as_number   | is_incremental | run_query    | var     |
| as_text     | load_result    | schema       | zip     |
| api         | log            | set          |         |
| builtins    | modules        | source       |         |
| config      | print          | statement    |         |

\* `adapter.expand_target_column_types` is not currently supported.

## Unsupported dbt jinja methods

The dbt jinja methods that are not currently supported are:

* debug
* selected_sources
* adapter.expand_target_column_types
* graph.nodes.values
* graph.metrics.values

## Missing something you need?

Submit an [issue](https://github.com/TobikoData/sqlmesh/issues), and we'll look into it!

Commit message:

feat!: add on_additive_change support (#5193)

docs/integrations/dbt.md, after:

# dbt

SQLMesh has native support for running dbt projects with its dbt adapter.

!!! tip

    If you've never used SQLMesh before, learn the basics of how it works in the [SQLMesh Quickstart](../quick_start.md)!

## Getting started

### Installing SQLMesh

SQLMesh is a Python library you install with the `pip` command. We recommend running your SQLMesh projects in a [Python virtual environment](../installation.md#python-virtual-environment), which must be created and activated before running any `pip` commands.

Most people do not use all of SQLMesh's functionality. For example, most projects only run on one [SQL execution engine](../integrations/overview.md#execution-engines).

Therefore, SQLMesh is packaged with multiple "extras," which you may optionally install based on the functionality your project needs. You may specify all your project's extras in a single `pip` call.

At minimum, using the SQLMesh dbt adapter requires installing the dbt extra:

```bash
> pip install "sqlmesh[dbt]"
```

If your project uses any SQL execution engine other than DuckDB, you must install the extra for that engine. For example, if your project runs on the Postgres SQL engine:

```bash
> pip install "sqlmesh[dbt,postgres]"
```

If you would like to use the [SQLMesh Browser UI](../guides/ui.md) to view column-level lineage, include the `web` extra:

```bash
> pip install "sqlmesh[dbt,web]"
```

Learn more about [SQLMesh installation and extras here](../installation.md#install-extras).

### Reading a dbt project

Prepare an existing dbt project to be run by SQLMesh by executing the `sqlmesh init` command *within the dbt project root directory* and with the `dbt` template option:

```bash
$ sqlmesh init -t dbt
```

This will create a file called `sqlmesh.yaml` containing the [default model start date](../reference/model_configuration.md#model-defaults). This configuration file is a minimum starting point for enabling SQLMesh to work with your DBT project.

As you become more comfortable with running your project under SQLMesh, you may specify additional SQLMesh [configuration](../reference/configuration.md) as required to unlock more features.

!!! note "profiles.yml"

    SQLMesh will use the existing data warehouse connection target from your dbt project's `profiles.yml` file so the connection configuration does not need to be duplicated in `sqlmesh.yaml`. You may change the target at any time in the dbt config and SQLMesh will pick up the new target.

### Setting model backfill start dates

Models **require** a start date for backfilling data through use of the `start` configuration parameter. `start` can be defined individually for each model in its `config` block or globally in the `sqlmesh.yaml` file as follows:

=== "sqlmesh.yaml"

    ```yaml
    model_defaults:
      start: '2000-01-01'
    ```

=== "dbt Model"

    ```jinja
    {{
      config(
        materialized='incremental',
        start='2000-01-01',
        ...
      )
    }}
    ```

### Configuration

SQLMesh derives a project's configuration from its dbt configuration files. This section outlines additional settings specific to SQLMesh that can be defined.

#### Selecting a different state connection

[Certain engines](https://sqlmesh.readthedocs.io/en/stable/guides/configuration/?h=unsupported#state-connection), like Trino, cannot be used to store SQLMesh's state.

In addition, even if your warehouse is supported for state, you may find that you get better performance by using a [traditional database](../concepts/state.md) to store state as these are a better fit for the state workload than a warehouse optimized for analytics workloads.

In these cases, we recommend specifying a [supported production state engine](../concepts/state.md#state) using the `state_connection` configuration.

This involves updating `sqlmesh.yaml` to add a gateway configuration for the state connection:

```yaml
gateways:
  "": # "" (empty string) is the default gateway
    state_connection:
      type: postgres
      ...

model_defaults:
  start: '2000-01-01'
```

Or, for a specific dbt profile defined in `profiles.yml`, eg `dev`:

```yaml
gateways:
  dev: # must match the target dbt profile name
    state_connection:
      type: postgres
      ...

model_defaults:
  start: '2000-01-01'
```

Learn more about how to configure state connections [here](https://sqlmesh.readthedocs.io/en/stable/guides/configuration/#state-connection).

#### Runtime vars

dbt supports passing variable values at runtime with its [CLI `vars` option](https://docs.getdbt.com/docs/build/project-variables#defining-variables-on-the-command-line).

In SQLMesh, these variables are passed via configurations. When you initialize a dbt project with `sqlmesh init`, a file `sqlmesh.yaml` is created in your project directory.

You may define global variables in the same way as a native project by adding a `variables` section to the config.

For example, we could specify the runtime variable `is_marketing` and its value `no` as:

```yaml
variables:
  is_marketing: no

model_defaults:
  start: '2000-01-01'
```

Variables can also be set at the gateway/profile level which override variables set at the project level. See the [variables documentation](../concepts/macros/sqlmesh_macros.md#gateway-variables) to learn more about how to specify them at different levels.

#### Combinations

Some projects use combinations of runtime variables to control project behavior. Different combinations can be specified in different `sqlmesh_config` objects, with the relevant configuration passed to the SQLMesh CLI command.

!!! info "Python config"

    Switching between different config objects requires the use of [Python config](../guides/configuration.md#python) instead of the default YAML config.

    You will need to create a file called `config.py` in the root of your project with the following contents:

    ```py
    from pathlib import Path
    from sqlmesh.dbt.loader import sqlmesh_config

    config = sqlmesh_config(Path(__file__).parent)
    ```

    Note that any config from `sqlmesh.yaml` will be overlayed on top of the active Python config so you dont need to remove the `sqlmesh.yaml` file

For example, consider a project with a special configuration for the `marketing` department. We could create separate configurations to pass at runtime like this:

```python
config = sqlmesh_config(
  Path(__file__).parent,
  variables={"is_marketing": "no", "include_pii": "no"}
)

marketing_config = sqlmesh_config(
  Path(__file__).parent,
  variables={"is_marketing": "yes", "include_pii": "yes"}
)
```

By default, SQLMesh will use the configuration object named `config`. Use a different configuration by passing the object name to SQLMesh CLI commands with the `--config` option. For example, we could run a `plan` with the marketing configuration like this:

```python
sqlmesh --config marketing_config plan
```

Note that the `--config` option is specified between the word `sqlmesh` and the command being executed (e.g., `plan`, `run`).

#### Registering comments

SQLMesh automatically registers model descriptions and column comments with the target SQL engine, as described in the [Models Overview documentation](../concepts/models/overview#model-description-and-comments). Comment registration is on by default for all engines that support it.

dbt offers similar comment registration functionality via its [`persist_docs` model configuration parameter](https://docs.getdbt.com/reference/resource-configs/persist_docs), specified by model. SQLMesh comment registration is configured at the project level, so it does not use dbt's model-specific `persist_docs` configuration.

SQLMesh's project-level comment registration defaults are overridden with the `sqlmesh_config()` `register_comments` argument. For example, this configuration turns comment registration off:

```python
config = sqlmesh_config(
    Path(__file__).parent,
    register_comments=False,
    )
```

### Running SQLMesh

Run SQLMesh as with a SQLMesh project, generating and applying [plans](../concepts/overview.md#make-a-plan), running [tests](../concepts/overview.md#tests) or [audits](../concepts/overview.md#audits), and executing models with a [scheduler](../guides/scheduling.md) if desired.

You continue to use your dbt file and project format.

## Workflow differences between SQLMesh and dbt

Consider the following when using a dbt project:

* SQLMesh will detect and deploy new or modified seeds as part of running the `plan` command and applying changes - there is no separate seed command. Refer to [seed models](../concepts/models/seed_models.md) for more information.
* The `plan` command dynamically creates environments, so environments do not need to be hardcoded into your `profiles.yml` file as targets. To get the most out of SQLMesh, point your dbt profile target at the production target and let SQLMesh handle the rest for you.
* The term "test" has a different meaning in dbt than in SQLMesh:
    - dbt "tests" are [audits](../concepts/audits.md) in SQLMesh.
    - SQLMesh "tests" are [unit tests](../concepts/tests.md), which test query logic before applying a SQLMesh plan.
* dbt's' recommended incremental logic is not compatible with SQLMesh, so small tweaks to the models are required (don't worry - dbt can still use the models!).

## How to use SQLMesh incremental models with dbt projects

Incremental loading is a powerful technique when datasets are large and recomputing tables is expensive. SQLMesh offers first-class support for incremental models, and its approach differs from dbt's.

This section describes how to adapt dbt's incremental models to run on sqlmesh and maintain backwards compatibility with dbt.

### Incremental types

SQLMesh supports two approaches to implement [idempotent](../concepts/glossary.md#idempotency) incremental loads:

* Using merge (with the sqlmesh [`INCREMENTAL_BY_UNIQUE_KEY` model kind](../concepts/models/model_kinds.md#incremental_by_unique_key))
* Using insert-overwrite/delete+insert (with the sqlmesh [`INCREMENTAL_BY_TIME_RANGE` model kind](../concepts/models/model_kinds.md#incremental_by_time_range))

#### Incremental by unique key

To enable incremental_by_unique_key incrementality, the model configuration should contain:

* The `unique_key` key with the model's unique key field name or names as the value
* The `materialized` key with value `'incremental'`
* Either:
    * No `incremental_strategy` key or
    * The `incremental_strategy` key with value `'merge'`

#### Incremental by time range

To enable incremental_by_time_range incrementality, the model configuration should contain:

* The `time_column` key with the model's time column field name as the value (see [`time column`](../concepts/models/model_kinds.md#time-column) for details)
* The `materialized` key with value `'incremental'`
* Either:
    * The `incremental_strategy` key with value `'insert_overwrite'` or
    * The `incremental_strategy` key with value `'delete+insert'`
    * Note: in this context, these two strategies are synonyms. Regardless of which one is specified SQLMesh will use the [`best incremental strategy`](../concepts/models/model_kinds.md#materialization-strategy) for the target engine.

### Incremental logic

SQLMesh requires a new jinja block gated by `{% if sqlmesh_incremental is defined %}`. The new block should supersede the existing `{% if is_incremental() %}` block and contain the `WHERE` clause selecting the time interval.

For example, the SQL `WHERE` clause with the "ds" column goes in a new jinja block gated by `{% if sqlmesh_incremental is defined %}` as follows:

```bash
> {% if sqlmesh_incremental is defined %}
>   WHERE
>     ds BETWEEN '{{ start_ds }}' AND '{{ end_ds }}'
> {% elif is_incremental() %}
>   ; < your existing is_incremental block >
> {% endif %}
```

`{{ start_ds }}` and `{{ end_ds }}` are the jinja equivalents of SQLMesh's `@start_ds` and `@end_ds` predefined time macro variables. See all [predefined time variables](../concepts/macros/macro_variables.md) available in jinja.

### Incremental model configuration

SQLMesh provides configuration parameters that enable control over how incremental computations occur. These parameters are set in the model's `config` block.

The [`batch_size` parameter](../concepts/models/overview.md#batch_size) determines the maximum number of time intervals to run in a single job.

The [`lookback` parameter](../concepts/models/overview.md#lookback) is used to capture late arriving data. It sets the number of units of late arriving data the model should expect and must be a positive integer.

**Note:** By default, all incremental dbt models are configured to be [forward-only](../concepts/plans.md#forward-only-plans). However, you can change this behavior by setting the `forward_only: false` setting either in the configuration of an individual model or globally for all models in the `dbt_project.yaml` file. The [forward-only](../concepts/plans.md#forward-only-plans) mode aligns more closely with the typical operation of dbt and therefore better meets user's expectations.

Similarly, the [allow_partials](../concepts/models/overview.md#allow_partials) parameter is set to `true` by default for incremental dbt models unless the time column is specified, or the `allow_partials` parameter is explicitly set to `false` in the model configuration.

#### on_schema_change

SQLMesh automatically detects both destructive and additive schema changes to [forward-only incremental models](../guides/incremental_time.md#forward-only-models) and to all incremental models in [forward-only plans](../concepts/plans.md#destructive-changes).

A model's [`on_destructive_change` and `on_additive_change` settings](../guides/incremental_time.md#schema-changes) determine whether it errors, warns, silently allows, or ignores the changes. SQLMesh provides fine-grained control over both destructive changes (like dropping columns) and additive changes (like adding new columns).

`on_schema_change` configuration values are mapped to these SQLMesh settings:

| `on_schema_change` | SQLMesh `on_destructive_change` | SQLMesh `on_additive_change` |
|--------------------|---------------------------------|------------------------------|
| ignore             | ignore                          | ignore                       |
| fail               | error                           | error                        |
| append_new_columns | ignore                          | allow                        |
| sync_all_columns   | allow                           | allow                        |


## Snapshot support

SQLMesh supports both dbt snapshot strategies of either `timestamp` or `check`.
Only unsupported snapshot functionality is `invalidate_hard_deletes` which must be set to `True`.
If set to `False`, then the snapshot will be skipped and a warning will be logged indicating this happened.
Support for this will be added soon.

## Tests
SQLMesh uses dbt tests to perform SQLMesh [audits](../concepts/audits.md) (coming soon).

Add SQLMesh [unit tests](../concepts/tests.md) to a dbt project by placing them in the "tests" directory.

## Seed column types

SQLMesh parses seed CSV files using [Panda's `read_csv` utility](https://pandas.pydata.org/pandas-docs/stable/reference/api/pandas.read_csv.html) and its default column type inference.

dbt parses seed CSV files using [agate's csv reader](https://agate.readthedocs.io/en/latest/api/csv.html#csv-reader-and-writer) and [customizes agate's default type inference](https://github.com/dbt-labs/dbt-common/blob/ae8ffe082926fdb3ef2a15486588f40c7739aea9/dbt_common/clients/agate_helper.py#L59).

If SQLMesh and dbt infer different column types for a seed CSV file, you may specify a [column_types](https://docs.getdbt.com/reference/resource-configs/column_types) dictionary in your `dbt_project.yml` file, where the keys define the column names and the values the data types.

``` yaml
seeds:
  <seed name>
    +column_types:
      <column name>: <SQL data type>
```

Alternatively, you can define this dictionary in the seed [seed properties configuration file](https://docs.getdbt.com/reference/seed-properties).

``` yaml
seeds:
  - name: <seed name>
    config:
      column_types:
        <column name>: <SQL data type>
```

You may also specify a column's SQL data type in its `data_type` key, as shown below. The file must list all columns present in the CSV file; SQLMesh's default type inference will be used for columns that do not specify the `data_type` key.

``` yaml
seeds:
  - name: <seed name>
    columns:
      - name: <column name>
        data_type: <SQL data type>
```

## Package Management
SQLMesh does not have its own package manager; however, SQLMesh's dbt adapter is compatible with dbt's package manager. Continue to use [dbt deps](https://docs.getdbt.com/reference/commands/deps) and [dbt clean](https://docs.getdbt.com/reference/commands/clean) to update, add, or remove packages.

## Documentation
Model documentation is available in the [SQLMesh UI](../quickstart/ui.md#2-open-the-sqlmesh-web-ui).

## Supported dbt jinja methods

SQLMesh supports running dbt projects using the majority of dbt jinja methods, including:

| Method      | Method         | Method       | Method  |
| ----------- | -------------- | ------------ | ------- |
| adapter (*) | env_var        | project_name | target  |
| as_bool     | exceptions     | ref          | this    |
| as_native   | from_yaml      | return       | to_yaml |
| as_number   | is_incremental | run_query    | var     |
| as_text     | load_result    | schema       | zip     |
| api         | log            | set          |         |
| builtins    | modules        | source       |         |
| config      | print          | statement    |         |

\* `adapter.expand_target_column_types` is not currently supported.

## Unsupported dbt jinja methods

The dbt jinja methods that are not currently supported are:

* debug
* selected_sources
* adapter.expand_target_column_types
* graph.nodes.values
* graph.metrics.values

## Missing something you need?

Submit an [issue](https://github.com/TobikoData/sqlmesh/issues), and we'll look into it!
